Spina bifida is a birth defect
caused by incomplete closure
of the spinal column before birth.
This leaves an opening in the child’s back
between the bones of the spine, or vertebrae.
Spinal membranes or even the
spinal cord itself
can bulge through the opening.
In mild spina bifida,
there may be only an opening in the
spine with no bulging of the spinal cord.
At its most severe,
the spinal cord sticks out
and is not covered by skin.
Treatment of spina bifida depends
on its location and severity.
When only the protective sac around
the spinal cord bulges out
and there is no nerve damage,
there is a good chance that the area
can be closed with surgery,
with no remaining effects.
When the spinal cord sticks out,
the child's legs may be paralyzed.
The severity of paralysis depends on
the location of the opening.
Treatment involves closing the opening
with surgery and monitoring the child's
growth and development.
It may also include:
Equipment such as waist
or leg braces, walkers, or crutches
Diet and bowel training, and
Therapy or devices to help bladder control.